Thank you for the introduction Lucy. Today I'll present to you the work that's made up my thesis, titled the Influence of Social Processes and Structures on cultural evolution. My thesis combined both experimental work using great tits, and computational models, to show how changes to the social networks of animals can impact the overall state of their socially learned, cultural behaviors.

Humans are surrounded by culture, or beliefs, behaviors and products that are passed on over generations of learners through social learning. Cultural behavior such as language, music, religion, specially adapted tools and weaponry, governing institutions have been argued to be a critical factor in our success in dominating nearly all of earth's habitats. Given the tremendous benefit of cultural inheritance, it begs the question of whether culture can be found across species.

If we adopt this very broad defintion of culture, then yes indeed we can find cultural traditions in non human animals, across taxa. These traditions are socially learned, rather than genetically controlled, and persist beyond one generation of learners. Animal culture can include behaviors like song, displays, and migration routes, although my thesis has focused on foraging behavior, or how animals find their food. In wild populations of animals, research has shown convincing evidence for traditions of moss sponging of water in chimpanzees, catching fish in conch shells or shelling behavior in dolphins. However, artificial traditions can also be sown into populations, such as the preference for using one side of the door rather than the other when opening a puzzle-box in great tits. However, this leaves open the very interesting questions of whether other species have the capacity for culture, their own traditions, and whether those traditions can change. We will come back to this.

These cultural behaviors are not necessarily static and can change in distribution and form over time in an evolutionary process.

Cultural behaviors exhibit variation, competition between variants and inheritance of those variants through social learning. These are the same ingredients that Darwin so convincingly argued lead to processes of natural selection, resulting in evolution in the distribution and form of animals. And he even remarked that such a process could be working on human language. This analogy to genetic evolution was picked up on in the 1970s and 1980s, and a mathematical theory of cultural evolution was drawn up. I've shown here diagrams of the dual inheritance theory, where genes, culture and the environment all interact with each other, resulting in evolutionary forces for both genes and culture over time.

Differential inheritance of cultural behaviors through social learning can lead to different distributions of cultural behaviors, as shown here. For example, a population can end up with a stable monomorphic culture, or a drifting polymorphic culture.

Culture can drift neutrally, like genes, but it can also become increasingly adapted to the environment the host organisms inhabit. The "simplest" type of cultural evolution was identified by Mesoudi and Thornton as the "core criteria", which is the evolution of a behavior up to a single optimum. A nice example of this is found in the evolution of flight paths of homing pigeons, as demonstrated by Takao Sasaki and Dora Biro. However, there can be further types of evolution, labeled the "extended criteria", such as cultural recombination, where two distinct lineages of culture are combined into higher payoff behavior. In the real world, this concept can be encapsulated by the automobile, which has recombined cultural innovations from thermodynamics, materials science, computer science, etc. This is illustrated in the recombination of medicinal items into. It's still an open question how animal cultures evolve, and whether they are limited to this core criteria, or whether more exotic evolutionary processes can take place.

This distinction of what goes on between individuals versus what goes on within individuals is reflected in two modeling traditions that have emerged in the animal culture literature: Network based diffusion analysis, and Experience Weighted Attraction modeling.

Before I introduce my study species, I'd also like to briefly convince you that the social organization of a population is critical for cultural evolution. As culture relies on social learning for the inheritance of behavior, social networks, and in particular association networks, place critical constraints on how culture evolves. Work has shown that features like population size and network density can impact culture. These are the features I would call social structure. However, less work has been done to show how dynamic social processes, changes to the social network, might influence culture, and this is where my thesis picks up on.



And just what is that inheritance structure of culture? Social learning.

And for humans, the ability of culture to create adaptive, readily accessible behavior, is attributed to their success in thriving in such diverse habitats across the earth.
